---
layout: post
date: 2016-08-21
title: My story
categories: my story
---




# How I became a Web Developer

### A little introduction

This is not you **how to become a web developer course** but more of a **How I did** kind of post. It is a series of posts where I tell my story, here's a list of "chapters":

#### How I became a Web Developer. Part one
1. Learning to Code take 1.
2. First contact with Web Developement.
3. Learning to Code take 2
4. Welcome to the rabbit hole.
5. Landing my first position.
6. Time to revaluate.
7. The fourth thme's the charm.
8. Cowboy up, or wait in the truck.

###  1. Learning to Code take 1

During my life, I was first introduced to coding in highscool, around 2007. It was a required course for those who wanted to become engineers I didn't have much choise.
  <br>
  <br>
There we would learn about variables, data types and loops in Pascal. Despite their good intentions, <!--more-->
the education we recieved there was rather messy, most relevant programing languages are written in English. Since neither the teacher nor the students were English speakers, so debuggin errors like
```pascal
Error : This must be a boolean value.
```

was increadible frustrating since we couldn't understand the documantation and the teacher was not the best explaining. Most lessons where focused on the logic of things like a `fo reach` loop rather than building something useful.

### 2. First contact with Web Developement

This was also a required course by the school. They would teach us during a semester how to create basic HTML static websites with some inline CSS. SEO optimization was not that relevant. All we learned was relevant, screen resolution was not something to worry about, that lasted two months until the first iPhone was introduced to the market.
  <br>
  <br>
The project was suposed to have working links to at leat four pages, it was hosted on some "Yahoo Sites" freemium service. I remeber spending a whole night trying to upload my project before the deadline, I deprived my self from sleeping just to find that I've had everything done three weeks before the deadline.

### 3. Learning to code take 2

This was somewhere around 2012. Now as a Industrial Robotics Engineering student, I was required to learn **Programing Fundamentals**. The programing language was C++.
  <br>
  <br>

And it very similar to what I experienced in highschool. We were *introduced* to fundamentals like data types, variables and the concept of IDE.
  <br>
  <br>
Same mistakes, new envyronment. This time I was the only English speaker in the room. I learned most of what I needed on the internet while eating pizza during the weekend, it was interesting but no one never showed us what you could be capable.

### 4. I want to develop an app for Android

After the course was finished, no more programing was taught in the course, at least not for two years. I looked for resourses but could find a site that was newbie friendoly. Then I started to look for a local programing ~~camp, course, school, lord of the code~~ or someone who could teach me how to it.
  <br>
  <br>
I found a free conference about how to get started. I got lost looking for the place since the adress was not the actual location. While being lost I made a friend, but never an app.

### 5. Walking into the rabbit hole

Three years forward, now in 2015. I dropped out of collage because of what started reading several books about finances. Ideas like a job won't make you rich, you need passive income, your college degree does not define you, I was naive and disturbed, it made me realize that most of what I learn would be irrelevant in a few years at best. Out of social preassure I decided to study administration in at open university system at UNAM.
  <br>
  <br>
I had a friend who was trying to start a company and needed to make a website, I was trying to help and ended up watching a video about how to make a responsive website on WordPress. It was a three hours long tutorial with ads included.
  <br>
  <br>
One of those ads, was about how everyone could learn how to code and change their lives forever. I saw more videos in the adviser's chanel, it was
  <br>
  <br>
Despite my first attempt to develope and Android App was a failure, times has changed so fast, now it was easier to learn. The advisor described it self as an online academy called [Treehouse](http://referrals.trhou.se/jaimemadrigalrios). For me, it was more like a Netflix for coding, it was so damn adictive.
  <br>
  <br>
They had this 15 days free trial, it took me an hour to make my decision. My premise was that I could learn how to code in six months, get a remote position, earn US dollars and live in mexican pesos. I was on summer vacations and my day would be divided into three activities, sleep, eat and learn. I spent a month or two like that so my learning curve was not that steep.
  <br>
  <br>
According to my Treehouse Accout, I've been actively learning for six months with some month-long breaks in between, some of them because of school, family.

### 6. Teach me how to ~~*dougie*~~  *code it*

I relearned some basic HTML, CSS and JavaScript. Then SASS, Flexbox, jQuery you name it. Since WordPress required it, I learned some PHP as well.
  <br>
  <br>
I've developed several iterations of [my personal portfolio](https://riosjaime.com).

1. Vanilla CSS & HTML version
2. Flexbox version.
3.  SASS version,
4. Bootstrap version.
5. Foundation version.
6. 6.Wordpress multiple pages version
7. Wordpress Single page version.
8. Vanilla PHP and Foundation version.

Every version looked  awesome and satisfied me for a week or so, until I learned some other new technology.
  <br>
  <br>
Last iteration for a whole weekend before applying for Front End Developer/ Web Design positions again, my fascination lasted three weeks until some robot/hacker started to send codes to my server at a rate of 3 per minute or something, by the time I disabled the form I've recieved about 131 emails. It was time to learn some more PHP in order to prevent this attack from happening again.

### 7. Landing my first position.

After three months I started to look for remote and local positions. A nice website really can get you a foot on the door.
  <br>
  <br>
**First interview**. It was for a Web Designer position, I arrived on time but choose not to show up because the facade of the place scared me and it didn't look like a place where I would like to work.
  <br>
  <br>
**Second Interview.** This time I was applying for a PHP Developer position. I felt really underqualified, most of my PHP experience was based on WordPress and a contact form. I haven't take the time to learn Laravel or some other PHP framework.
  <br>
  <br>
**Third Interview**. This was a Front End Developer position in startup. They had a really small team of no more than five people. The founder who was supossed to run the interview had to leave because  of an emergency, his assistant did the interview instead, she asked me to review the design of  a pamphlet, she was excited because of my response. It felt so close and real. She told me she'd talk to her boss on Monday and call me back if required. It wasn't.
  <br>
  <br>
 I visited some events in the local PHP comunity and every time I visited I felt dumb. They were welcoming people but every speaker talked about things way beyond my area of expertise. I spent another month inmersed in learning web development before trying again.
  <br>
  <br>
Despite never having a job before, this [this iteration of my website](https://riosjaime.com) was good enough to got me a foot on the door, or at least it was until the spam attack.
  <br>
  <br>
**Fourth interview**. The position was as a Front End Developer with PHP. This was a consulting agency or something like that, they shared offices with an internet provider and had a great view. I was a good fit, three weeks passed and they didn't called me back.
  <br>
  <br>
**Fifth interview**. It was a Front End Developer position, I've applied before but they didn't remember, I didn't tell them and that time I got a call but never made it to the interview. This was an agency that worked with Magento, they had a Graphic Designer, someone to do the backend and needed someone who could use Bootstrap, CSS and that basic kind of stuff. This time I was a perfect fit.
  <br>
  <br>
They wouldn't pay much, but would teach warranty a Magento Certification. I was unawere of what Magento could do for me and the value of the education they would offer so I declined the offer.

### 8. As you reap so shall you sow

So far, I've had several  interviews and one of them ready to hire me. I choose to decline it, but most of them *wouldn't pay that much* .
  <br>
  <br>
By this time I started to listen to Earl Nightingale on Spotify. It is important because it helped me change my paradigm.
  <br>
  <br>
This time I would take the job without considering how much they would pay, I would serve first,  solve problems, bring value to the team. Then I would talk about my paycheck, not the other way arround.

### 7. The fourth time's the charm

A wild email appeared my phone. It was the interviewer, Earl (not his real name) from the fourth interview, he was ready to hire me, just wanted to know if I was till available. They needed me to start on Monday. They would pay a little above minimmal wage for Mexico 8 000 MXN a month. And I was supossed to expect a call from HR.
  <br>
  <br>
I arrived on time. We signed some sorth of mixed contract for three months. It is  used to reduce the amount of taxes and social security an employer pays, which takes advantaje of a loop whole in the local law. Aparently it is a common practice in Mexico.
  <br>
  <br>
Remember, serve first. I spent most of the day waitnig for Earl, he was supossed to bring my computer and show me the projects the team was developing. My computer was good, but not the best. It was a Lenovo laptop with some i5 and Windows. Certainly a latpop with  i7 with MacOS or some distro of Linux installed on a SSD couldn't offend me.
  <br>
  <br>
Then , Earl gave me a PSD footer that I needed to code, nothing beyond my abilities, unitl...

### 8. Cowboy up or wait in the truck.

He gave me a flash drive with the files, it was so messy. Inline-css, no VCS, no BEM convention, no gulp, no sassy SASS and no media queryes allowed. Even Team Treehouse has a course dedicated to explain what a modern workflow looks like.

> I don't always run tests, but when I do, I do in production.

IE compatibility was first, responsive web design was second.Instead of coding, I would go with him and seek to understand why did the client made that decision, he didin't. Earl did.
  <br>
  <br>
So we spent the rest of day arguing. I would not be a cowboy, he refused to use SASS. I've read Dale Carnegie's book several times, and I was trying to be respectful. He wasn't, he went over my portfolio and started to "criticize" my work.
  <br>
  <br>
Despite all of this, it was a problem of education, he had a major in Computer SCience, I had a never stop learning paradimg. He was not a bad person, he was doing what he has been thaught.
  <br>
  <br>
I went to HR and explained the situation and said that despite of my three-months-contract being signed, I wanted to take the rest of the week and evaluate if it was still a win win for both parts. Yup, I literally said that. She proposed to talk to the boss aka, our Project Manager the next morning.
  <br>
  <br>
The next morning arrived. The Project Manager propossed to give me a new project to tackle alone on Friday, do it ***"my way"*** and then evaluate results, until then, please help Earl. It seemed reasonable to me. He also agreed to stop supporting IE9.

### 9. Give your ~~heart~~ code a break

This time Earl, was eager to give gulp a try. I would spend all of the day creating a recipe. The bigger problem I had was not writing code but trying to decide, WHAT  the recipe needed to do.
  <br>
  <br>
I gave it to him, it succeeded. The next day he was interested in SCSS. I explained him how to use variables, include partials and a BEM convetion. I also fixed a bug on IE11 which increased the feeling of working as a team.
  <br>
  <br>
Fourth day I had a PSD to work with. I aprecieate the freedom but even PSD feels old. I would expect some Balsamiq Mockup haha.
  <br>
  <br>
Fifht day I quited, They did nothing wrong, I just got a gig with another Entreprenaur who is more similar to whtat I want to acomplish in the future.
